Today we're going to talk about how
to move your application to Unicode.
[Transcript missing]
So today we're going to cover in detail
what's required to move your world
script based application to Unicode.
And we're going to do a lightening tour
of all the aspects of an application,
how to store text, your human interface
and your localization,
drawing, editing, and input, sorting,
doing transformations on
text and analyzing it,
and also formatting
and scanning of dates,
times, and numbers,
and also calendar manipulations.
So we're not going to go into
incredible detail on any of those areas,
but to sort of give you a tour
so you know which APIs to use to
convert your application to Unicode.
And all of the APIs we're going to
talk about today are in the core
foundation and Carbon areas of Mac OS X.
And we're going to show how to
map from the older technologies,
the Script Manager, text utilities,
and so on, to these newer APIs.
But before we do that,
I'd like to just spend a couple of
slides talking about what's new in
Tiger in the international area.
And we do have some new features.
And the first one is something
that people have been
asking for for a long time.
In Tiger,
we have the first stage of our support
for OpenType font layout tables.
So this allows OpenType fonts
to work in Unicode applications.
If you're using our
standard Unicode APIs,
you don't have to do anything
special in your application.
OpenType fonts will just work.
So we're supporting features
like ligatures and language
shaping in certain cases.
And you'll see the support
for OpenType layout increase
more and more as time goes on.
Something that was missing
from our Unicode API suite
was string transliteration.
This is something you could
do in the Script Manager.
There was an API in the
text utilities to do it,
but there was no Unicode equivalent,
and we've now got that in Tiger.
We have even more locale data available,
and as with Panther,
much of that locale data is only
available through Unicode APIs.
So it's very important to move your
application to Unicode so you can take
advantage of all the languages and all
the locales that Mac OS X supports.
Just as a side note,
this is a Carbon session,
but there has been a Carbon date
control for a long time,
and new in Tiger is
equivalent Cocoa date control,
so that's available.
We had some support for
non-Gregorian calendars in Panther,
and we're improving
that support in Tiger.
So in addition to the Japanese and
Thai Buddhist calendars,
which we had in Panther,
we're adding Islamic and
Hebrew calendar support.
And in addition, in Panther,
you could only use one of the
non-Gregorian calendars if you
were using the date and time
formats that went with it.
So for example,
you could only use the Japanese calendar
with the Japanese locale or
the Thai Buddhist calendar
with the Thai locale.
In Tiger, you can select the calendar
separately from the date/time formats.
So here you see examples
of the Islamic calendar
and the Japanese calendar
being used with the U.S.
English locale.
We've also added more control
over number and date formatting.
So we introduced CFDate Formatter
and CFNumber Formatter in Panther,
but now you have more control
over how they operate.
There are more options.
There's also a new option
for number spell-out.
So in addition to all the
formatting options we had before,
you can spell out numbers.
There's an example there, 123.45.
And this is not just for English.
It works with any of the
locales that Mac OS X supports.
So that's a new feature.
Every release,
we try to extend our Unicode
coverage a little bit.
And so this time,
we're moving more Roman and Greek and
Cyrillic support into our core fonts.
So we used to have separate fonts,
for example, for Cyrillic support.
And we're extending our core fonts,
and that's Times, Helvetica, and Courier,
to support a wider variety
of Roman and Greek characters
and also adding Cyrillic.
In addition,
we're covering some new Unicode blocks,
and that's Tamil, Braille,
Yijing hexagram symbols, Taishuanjing,
and Taishuanjing symbols.
And not all of this is in the preview
release that you have in your hands,
but it will be showing up.
And there are possibly more
blocks we might be covering
that aren't listed here that are
still a little bit up in the air,
but every release,
we try to add a little bit more.
So, oh, and one last thing.
Okay.
So some of the language IDs that
we've used in Mac OS X up till
now have not exactly followed
the standards in the area.
So, for example, we use ZH underscore
TW for traditional Chinese.
And in Tiger,
we're adding support to move
to canonical language IDs.
There are some examples.
And there are new APIs that have
been added to CFLocale that can
help you canonicalize language IDs.
So that if you have...
A localization for your application
that uses an old ID and you need
to compare it against a new ID,
these APIs can help you make sure you
do the comparison in a canonical way.
So in order to show some of
the new features in Tiger,
I'd like to ask John Jenkins to
come up on stage,
and he'll give us a short
demonstration of what's new in Tiger.
All right.
As Deborah says,
there's an awful lot that's new in Tiger,
and we don't really have time to
go over anywhere near all of it,
so I'm just going to hit
some of the highlights,
some of the really exciting things.
And we'll start out
with an exciting thing,
which is the transliteration APIs.
So here we have a sentence or a word,
I guess, which is in Latin,
and I want to know what
this would look like,
for example, in Greek,
and I can change it.
Or I want to know what it
would look like in Katakana,
and I can change it.
Although I'm not quite
sure that the accent works,
or the upside-down exclamation
point really works in Japanese,
but that's okay.
Also useful is turning it to XML hex.
This is very handy.
This goes through and takes all of
the non-ASCII letters and converts
them into the numeric entities that
you would use on a web page or in XML.
Or if you really want
to know what's going on,
you can always get the Unicode name
of the character that's not in ASCII,
which is also handy.
And of course, we can go the other way.
We have a lot of things that
will let us transform to Latin.
If I get a sentence here, for example,
this is the beginning,
the first line of the Iliad for all the
people who are fans of the movie Troy,
I can turn it into Latin.
I could also strip it of its
combining marks if I wanted to,
remove all of those.
I can take other examples
and turn them into Latin.
So I have an Arabic sentence, I hope,
and I can turn that into Latin,
or I can take something
that's in Japanese.
And again, I can turn it into Latin.
So I can get a first
approximation transliteration.
One thing that's useful for Chinese,
here I have an instance of a
sentence which is partly in Cyrillic,
partly in Chinese.
I can turn the whole thing
into Latin if I want,
or I can just take the Chinese part
and turn it into Latin.
So a lot of useful transliteration
APIs are available now.
Now, Deborah also mentioned that
we have a lot more locales.
Let's just bring up a
list of our locales.
These are the locales that are
available on the system in Tiger,
together with some of the
information you can get about them.
This is pretty useful information, too.
The one thing which I don't
think is wildly useful is metric,
that is, whether or not this locale
uses the metric system,
because it amounts to whether or
not you are in the United States,
but that's okay.
Currently, it defaults to showing
them in the global locale.
But we can switch back and forth so
I can see what each of these looks like.
And you'll notice that some of these
are showing up in the last resort font.
These are locales that we
don't have system support for,
but that's okay.
On Mac OS X, it's very easy for third
parties to add support.
So if I want to take one of
these and I want to see a date,
say, in the Islamic calendar,
let's not use an unsupported locale.
Okay, German.
So I want to see what today's date is.
This is today.
Today's date in the Islamic calendar
as shown in Latin letters
in the German locale.
So we have a great deal of flexibility
for date and time formatting
that we didn't used to have.
All right.
So that covers two.
The third is the really exciting thing,
I think.
This is something, as Debra says,
that people have been desperately
asking us for for a long time,
and that's open type support.
So it's not fully wired up yet,
but it is enough there
that we can show it to you.
Okay.
So I'm going to take
-- this is World Text,
which is a standard application
that comes with the developer tools.
And I'm going to switch
to Adobe Caslon Pro.
This is unaltered, nothing up my sleeves,
straight out of the box Adobe Caslon.
And I can start typing.
Let's see.
Let's come up with something here.
Okay.
And you'll notice that as I typed,
the ligature formed automatically.
FL formed automatically.
FI formed automatically.
[Transcript missing]
I always get the code name.
Intend 3, there we go.
You can see more of what's
available in the font.
For example,
I can turn on rare ligatures.
And as the system does
now with AET fonts,
it does with OpenType fonts and Tiger.
It scans through.
It sees what is in the font.
It gives us support for
all of these things.
I can turn on lining figures.
I can turn on superiors.
Let me see if that works.
Yeah, well, that's kind of cool.
And so on.
So there's a lot of flexibility
here that's available.
The font has it built in.
The system just picks it up.
So look forward to it.
Thank you.
Thank you, John.
Okay, so now that we've seen
what's new in Tiger,
let's start moving into the
detailed part of the presentation.
We're going to go on our whirlwind
tour of the WorldScript APIs and
what to replace them with.
So before we start talking about
things that you can do with text,
we have to talk about how you
store your text in the first place.
So that's our first topic.
Before we do that,
let's have a quick refresher
on what's different about
Unicode compared to WorldScript.
The Uni in UniCode means one,
and the most important thing about
UniCode is there's only one character
set you have to worry about,
unlike WorldScript,
where there were many.
Unicode stores characters in
16-bit units in the UTF-16 form,
which is what we use in
Mac OS X in Cocoa and Carbon,
but since Unicode has more
than 96,000 characters,
how do you fit that in a 16-bit unit?
Well, the answer is you can't,
and some characters need more
than one unit to be stored,
and there's an example right there.
The Unicode character 2000B,
which is from the plane
to Han characters,
is actually stored as two 16-bit
units called a surrogate pair.
Now, when I talk about a character here,
a Unicode character,
that's the programmer's
concept of a character.
What the user thinks of as a character
can actually be larger than that.
we call a grapheme or a cluster,
and it can consist of one Unicode
character or two Unicode characters.
So here's a couple of examples.
We have the word resume,
but the accented E's are represented
by base letter E plus what's
called a combining acute accent.
So you have two Unicode characters,
the E and the accent,
that represent one user character.
In the next example, there's even more.
This is the Vietnamese word
for Vietnamese,
and you can see that we have
an E with two combinators,
two combining accents,
a dot below and a circumflex above.
So this is three Unicode characters
that represent what the user
thinks of as a single character.
To make life a little more interesting,
there's actually multiple
ways to do this in Unicode.
In addition to the base
letter and combining marks
that we used in this example,
there are also pre-composed
versions of these characters.
So there is an E with an acute accent
that's a single Unicode character,
and there is an E with a dot below,
and a circumflex above that's
a single Unicode character.
But you can't always represent every
character in a totally pre-composed form,
and conversely,
you can't always represent a given
character in a totally decomposed form.
So even though there are
versions of Unicode that we call
pre-composed and decomposed,
they really mean as pre-composed as
possible and as decomposed as possible.
So even in pre-composed Unicode,
you do have to worry about
things like combining marks,
because they can be present.
Okay, so in the world script world,
the way you stored your text was in
a Pascal string or in a C string.
Those don't support Unicode,
or at least not in the form that
we needed for Carbon and Cocoa,
so what do you do in the new world?
Well, if you're using Core Foundation,
you can use CFString or
CF mutable string,
or new in Tiger is CF attributed string.
If you need to work at a lower level,
you can just store Unicode
text as arrays of Unicar,
which is a type defined in Carbon,
or actually at a very low level.
So there are a lot of
APIs for CFString and friends,
and I don't have time
to go through them all,
but just to give you a
flavor of how the API works,
here's a few examples.
You can create a CFString using
an array of Unicars.
In this example, we pass null,
which indicates the default storage
allocator for Core Foundation.
We pass an array of Unicars,
and we pass their number,
and that will give us
back a CFString object.
You can also get characters
back from a CFString.
In order to get the best performance,
you can use an inline buffer.
And the way you do that is you set
up an inline buffer on a CFString,
and then you can ask to get
a character at any index,
and the inline buffer will take care
of batching access to the string so you
get the most efficient access possible.
Nguyen Tiger is
attributed string support,
and an attributed string wraps an
existing CFString as opposed to
you putting the characters into
the attributed string directly.
So you can create an attributed
string by passing a CFString and
a dictionary of attributes.
They can be totally arbitrary
attributes that's not just a fixed set,
although there are a predefined set.
And you can also get the attributes at a
particular point of an attributed string.
So you pass the attributed string,
the index where you
want to get attributes,
and also a pointer to a range.
The range gets set to the run.
of the attributes so you know.
How big a stretch of text has
those particular attributes?
And then the function call returns
the dictionary of attributes
that apply to that range.
Now, something that those of you who've
programmed in WorldScript know
is that when you're dealing
with double-byte character sets,
you can't just break a string at an
arbitrary byte offset because it might be
in the middle of a double-byte character.
And you used character byte
type to determine if there
was a safe place to break.
We can't use character byte
type in a Unicode application,
but there's a similar
issue to worry about,
and that is the user characters
that I talked about earlier,
or what's called a cluster or a grapheme.
You don't want to break in the
middle of that because if you do,
and then you only display the
first part before the break,
you'll actually mangle what the
user thinks of as their character
and display the wrong thing.
So there are APIs available to help
you find a safe place to break.
If you're using a CFString,
you can use CFString get range
of composed characters at index,
and that will find a safe place to break.
If you're using a Unicar array,
then you can use the Unicode
utilities find text break API and
look for a cluster boundary,
and that will also tell
you a safe place to break.
So here's an example.
We have a string and an offset,
and we want to figure out
a safe place to break.
So we call CFString get range
of composed characters at index.
We pass our string,
and we pass the index, that is,
the place where we would like to break.
And what the API returns is a range,
which is the beginning and the end
of the user character or the cluster
that corresponds to that offset.
So in this case, we take that range,
and we go to the end of it.
We take the beginning location
and add the length in,
and that's the place where we can break.
We could also just use the beginning
part of the range instead of the end.
That depends on how you want
your application to work.
Another thing you need to do
is to figure out what kind of
character a given character is.
Is it a letter?
Is it a digit?
So forth.
In the WorldScript world,
you used character type for that,
but that doesn't work with Unicode,
so we can't use it anymore.
In the Unicode world,
there's two ways to do this.
There's a CF character set, APIs,
and core foundation.
And at a lower level,
there's UC get car property.
So here's an example to determine
whether a character is a decimal digit.
Now, you might think to determine whether
something is a decimal digit,
you can just say, well,
is it ASCII 0 through 9?
But it turns out in Unicode,
there are lots more decimal
digits than just those.
There are decimal digits
for Indic languages,
for Arabic,
and all of those are just as valid.
So we can call it as decimal digits as
the ASCII versions that we're used to.
So to test whether any
character is a decimal digit,
we can use CF character set.
So first,
we get a predefined CF character set,
in this case, the set of decimal digits.
And then we can call CF character
set is long character member in order
to determine whether a given Unicode
character is a member of that set or not.
And then we can branch
one way or the other.
depending on the answer.
Well,
it would be wonderful if your application
could deal only with Unicode and never
have to think about anything else,
but there's still a lot of data
out there that's not in Unicode.
There's documents that users have.
I have documents on my system
that date back almost to the
time the Mac was introduced,
and those are definitely not
in Unicode because it hadn't
even been invented then.
There are protocols on the Internet that
still require non-Unicode character sets.
The Web is a big example.
You can use Unicode on the Web, but many,
many Web pages are not in Unicode.
So you need to be able to
move between the Unicode world
and the non-Unicode world,
and we've had support in Mac OS X for
this for a long time in the form
of the Text Encoding Converter,
which is a fairly low-level API.
That even actually
dates back to Mac OS 9,
but there's easier ways
to do it using CFString.
And again, there's a wide variety of
APIs that you can use to do this,
and we're only going to go
through a couple of them.
In the first example, you can create a
CFString using a C string,
and all you need to do
is pass the C string,
which is null terminated,
and a text encoding to use.
And that will give you back a CFString,
which is in UniCode.
If you want a little bit more control,
for example,
your string isn't null terminated,
you want to control what happens
if the data is not in the C string,
then you can pass the C string,
which is null terminated,
and a text encoding to use.
If the data can't be
converted completely,
then you can use
CFString create with bytes,
which gives you finer control.
So one question you might have is,
what do I pass for that text encoding?
And that's actually a
non-trivial question.
It depends a lot on where
the data is coming from.
If you're lucky and the data is coming,
say, from an internet protocol and it's
tagged with its character set,
then you know what encoding to pass.
But sometimes you have to guess.
And two good guesses are the
encoding that corresponds to your
application's human interface.
So if, for example,
if your application is running
in Japanese and you call get
application text encoding,
you'll get Mac Japanese back
as the encoding.
A different encoding is
CFString get system encoding,
and that's the text encoding
that corresponds to the user's
most preferred language.
Now,
the user's most preferred language is
not always the same as the language
that your application is running in.
And the reason for that is
that the user's most preferred
language may be one that your
application is not localized into.
So, for example,
if the user's most preferred language is
Inuktitut and you don't have an Inuktitut
localization in your application,
then you're not going to
be running in Inuktitut.
In that case,
the application text encoding
and the user's text encoding
are not going to match.
So which one of these you call
depends on your application.
And where the data is coming from.
Another thing you have to worry about
on the Internet or when sending Unicode
to Windows is that other systems do
not deal with the decomposed form of
Unicode quite as well as Mac OS X does.
And so it's better to convert Unicode
to what's called Normalization Form C,
which is the as pre-composed as possible
form before you send it to those systems,
and you can use
CFString Normalize to do that.
And a new feature in Tiger is
that you can determine the
text encoding used by MLTE.
So if you're using the
multilingual text engine,
which is the Carbon-Unicode text engine,
you can now specify the text
encoding to use when opening
or saving to plain text files.
And that's a new feature in Tiger.
Okay, so we've covered the basics of how
to store your text and how to get
it in and out of your application,
but there's more text to your application
than just what's in the user's document.
There's also the text that you create
yourself for your human interface,
and let's spend a little
time talking about that.
Well, in the old world,
you used the Resource Manager to store
the localized pieces of your application.
I used resources like D-log or Menu,
or if you're using Power Plant,
maybe you're using PPOB resources.
Well, those resources are all based
on the old-world script world,
and they can't support Unicode.
So the modern equivalence
for a Unicode application,
or indeed any modern application,
is the bundle, which I'm sure you've all
heard of about already,
but I'll just give a very brief review.
An application bundle is a directory tree
in the file system that's made to look
to the end user as if it's a single file.
You can store non-localized files,
localized files, files of any type,
actually.
It's totally up to you.
Movies, strings, what have you.
Localized files are stored
in an LPROJ directory,
and the LPROJ directory is tagged
with the ISO language code for
the particular language that
that localization corresponds to.
So, for example, EN for English,
JA for Japanese.
One of the most important kinds of
things you can store in your application
bundle are interface builder files,
or NIB files.
And those are the files that
contain UI elements and replace
the old resources that were used
with the Control Manager and
the Dialog Manager and so forth,
the ones that didn't support UniCode.
And there's a small set of APIs you can
use for NIBs with Carbon applications.
You can create a NIB reference
from your application bundle,
and once you have that,
you can get your menu bar out,
you can get menus out,
you can get windows out
with HIView hierarchies.
It's very straightforward to use.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, well,
a big part of any application that
deals with text is drawing it,
editing it, and inputting it.
And there are several
APIs available to do that.
Now, when you talk about drawing text,
you can sort of partition
applications into two classes,
or at least you can partition
text drawing into two classes.
First is drawing short strings.
And in the WorldScript world,
namely Quickdraw text,
you did that with either
DrawString or TextBox.
The UniCode equivalents
are DrawThemeTextBox,
which is very straightforward.
It just takes a CFString.
And you can use that when you're happy to
just use one of the standard theme fonts.
If you need more control,
you can call one of two MLTE APIs,
either TXN DrawCFStringTextBox or
TXN DrawUnicodeTextBox.
And the only difference between
them is one takes a CFString and
the other takes a Unicar*,
so depending on how your text is stored.
And that gives you actually
a lot more control,
not just fonts,
but also you can specify a CG context.
You can control things
like rotation and so on.
and so on.
Now, sometimes an application has
to draw large amounts of text,
and by that I mean drawing a document,
implementing a text editing engine,
implementing a web browser where you
have to paint large amounts of text,
and the APIs on the previous
slide are not really appropriate
for those kinds of tasks.
Also,
sometimes you need a lot more control
over the way text is rendered,
and again, the previous APIs are
a little too simple.
Well, in the Quick Draw text world,
we use things like Draw Text,
Measure Text,
a few supported bidirectional texts
you had to call Get Format Order.
There are a whole bunch of APIs to call,
and it's too complicated to
go into in a talk like this.
The equivalent set of APIs to use in
the UniCode world for Carbon is Atsui,
Apple-type services for UniCode imaging,
and again, that's a rather large API set.
And rendering complex text is a
sufficiently difficult problem that
I'm not going to get into it in
the two or three minutes I would
have to cover it in this session.
So there's a great online reference,
Rendering UniCode Text with Atsui.
I strongly recommend you start
there if Atsui is new to you.
In addition, there's a session on Friday,
Session 425,
Modern Text Layout and Editing
for Carbon Applications,
where you can go to hear all
about Atsui and MLTE and to talk
to the engineers who work on it.
Now, a much more ideal way of dealing
with text is not to have to render
large amounts of it yourself,
but to use one of the
built-in text editing engines.
That's a lot easier
than building your own.
The text editing engine in the
WorldScript world was called TextEdit,
and there's also a control
to go along with it,
the EditText control, but unfortunately,
they can't support Unicode,
and they're now deprecated.
So the modern UniCode equivalent is MLTE,
the Multilingual Text Engine, and again,
I'm not going to go into
the details of the MLTE.
Whoops, oh, it's up there,
but it's not down here.
I'm not going to go into
the details of the MLTE API,
but there's a very nice online
reference that you can read.
And a new option that was introduced,
I think, in--was it Panther?--for
HITextView was HITextView,
which makes it even easier to use MLTE.
It wraps it up in an HIView object,
so it can be part of an HIView hierarchy.
And could I... My monitor
picture has disappeared,
so it would be nice to
get some support for that.
In addition to HITextView,
there's also a Unicode version
of the EditText control,
so that basically gives equivalent
functionality but supports Unicode.
And I have here a few API examples
just to give you a flavor.
You call HITextViewCreate,
and that will create a new HITextView for
you that wraps up an MLTE object.
And the nice thing about
HITextView is it's not totally opaque.
You can get at the underlying
MLTE object so that you can do
more advanced operations with it.
You can save and open documents
and so forth and so on,
and you just call
HITextViewGetTxnObject to get that out.
And UniCode Text Control is
very easy to create.
You just call Create,
Edit UniCode Text Control.
You'll have to forgive me as my
head swivels around for a while
as I've lost my monitor here.
Maybe I'll move over here so
I can see the podium monitor
while they're taking care of that.
Okay, another problem,
if you are implementing your own text
editing engine or for some other reason
you have to handle text input directly,
then in the very, very, very old world,
you might have called wait next event,
or in the ancient world,
even get next event.
Hopefully nobody's calling that anymore.
If you are supporting languages
like Japanese or Chinese,
hopefully your application is already
using TSM and you are calling new
TSM document and specifying a text
service document interface type.
Well, unfortunately,
that doesn't support Unicode,
but there is a new document type,
Unicode document interface type,
that you can call new TSM document with,
and that will create a
TSM document that supports Unicode.
In the old version of the OS,
that was done with Apple events,
but for the last several releases,
it's been done with Carbon events.
And you want to avoid the
keyboard class Carbon events,
because those are raw keyboard events,
and if you look at those,
that will be before the input
method has a chance to work on them.
So you want to look at the text after
the input method has processed it,
and the two Carbon events for that are
the text input UniCode for key event,
and that's what comes from input
methods or keyboard layouts.
And then there's the text
input UniCode text event,
and that's what comes from
non-keyboard entry methods such
as the character palette or ink.
And you can basically handle
those pretty much the same way.
Now, if you're a TSM aware application,
there's several more Carbon events
you have to deal with,
but those are the same between
UniCode and non-Unicode applications,
and so we're not going
to talk about them today.
Okay,
so we know how we're storing our text,
we know how we're getting it
into and out of our application,
we know how we're
drawing and inputting it,
but there's also operations
on the text itself.
Something that's important in a lot of
applications is sorting and searching.
In the old WorldScript world,
we only supported sorting,
and you would call string order
or text order in order to do
a comparison of two strings.
And of course, that depended on what the
current script system was.
In the UniCode world,
there are several APIs available.
The easiest one to use
is CFStringCompare,
and you just give it two
CFStrings and some options on how
you want the strings compared,
and it will tell you whether
they're the same or one is less
than or greater than the other.
If you're working with arrays of Unicars,
you can call the lower-level
API UCCompareText.
Now, if you're going to be doing sorting,
you're going to be doing a lot
of key comparisons in your sort,
and you may be comparing
the same key multiple times.
There is some overhead involved
in doing a language and
Unicode-sensitive comparison,
so if you're going to be doing something
like sorting a large amount of data,
it's more efficient to get something
that's called a collation key.
And a collation key is a string of bytes
that does a binary compare the same way
that the underlying string would do a
language and Unicode-sensitive compare.
So what you can do is call the Unicode
utilities get collation key for a given
text collator and a string of unicars,
and you'll get back a binary key that you
can just compare using binary ordering,
and that can make your sort
go significantly faster.
If you're something that you
couldn't do in the WorldScript world
but you can do in the UniCode
world is search for substrings.
And again, CFString makes it very easy.
There's CFString find.
You give your target string and a
substring that you want to look for in
that target string and search options,
and it will find the instances.
You can step through them.
You can also look for more
than just a substring.
You can also find instances of
characters in a CF character set.
And again, this is just a sample of
the APIs that are available.
There are a lot more APIs available
for sorting and searching,
and I urge you to check out
the documentation for CFString.
It has a lot of capabilities.
Sometimes you need to change
the case of something,
and we have uppercase text and
lowercase text available in the
text utilities for doing that,
but they don't work with Unicode.
The modern equivalent for a
Unicode application is in CFString,
and there's CFStringUppercase,
which converts everything to uppercase.
You'll notice that it
takes two parameters,
a string and a locale.
The reason for that is that
the rules about how to convert
uppercase to lowercase or
lowercase to uppercase differ a
little from language to language.
For example, in Turkish,
the rules are different from English,
and so you need to pass a locale if you
want the case conversion to be done in
a correct language-sensitive fashion.
Something that you can do with
CFString that you couldn't do in
the Script Manager is caching.
If you want to be able to do that,
you need to use a C-file.
You can use a C-file if
you want to use a C-file,
but you can't use a C-file
if you want to use a C-file.
You can use a C-file if
you want to use a C-file,
but you can't use a C-file
if you want to use a C-file.
You can use a C-file if you want to use
a C-file if you want to use a C-file.
[Transcript missing]
And again, this is new in Tiger,
and this is in the WWDC preview
release that you've received,
so you can experiment with it.
There's also other
manipulations on strings,
just basically moving
parts of strings around.
And in the WorldScript world,
we had Munger.
Munger just works on bytes.
In addition, it requires that your
text be in a handle.
There are several options
available to replace Munger if
you're working with Unicode.
CFStringReplace is very easy to use.
You take a mutable string,
a range of that string
that you want to replace,
and what to replace it with.
Very straightforward.
There's also CFStringCreateWithFormat
and CFStringAppendWithFormat,
which work a lot like Printf.
And again,
those are fully UniCode compatible.
There's also CFStringTrim,
which will remove constant strings from
the beginning or end of a CFString,
a mutable string, that is.
And also CFStringTrimWhitespace,
which will remove whitespace characters.
And if you really need to
just move bytes around,
then there's the standard
C library routine.
And there's the standard
C library routine memmove,
which handles arbitrary byte
moves and deals with issues like
overlapping source and destination.
If you have an application
that displays text in a list,
or presents text in a fixed size space,
if you have a string that's
too large for that space,
or in a list if it's too
large for the column,
then you need to truncate the string.
And that needs to be done in a
unicode and language sensitive way.
In the script manager world,
we had trunk string and
trunk text to do that.
There's two ways to do
that in the unicode world.
One very nice option if you're
using ATSUI directly is to use
ATSUI's line truncation tag.
And what that will actually
do is truncate the string
while it's being drawn.
So you don't actually have to
modify the string itself in memory.
What you can do is tell ATSUI that you
need to draw the string in a fixed width,
and if you specify the
line truncation tag,
if it fits by itself, that's fine.
If it's a little too big,
ATSUI will try to squish it down a little
bit first so it can draw the whole thing.
And if it still doesn't fit,
then ATSUI will truncate the
string and insert an ellipsis.
If you want to actually
truncate the data itself,
which is the way that trunk
string and trunk text worked,
then you can call truncate theme text,
which is a unicode equivalent.
Something that's very important for
applications that deal with text
is finding appropriate boundaries.
So we already talked
about a cluster boundary,
which corresponds to what the
user thinks of as a character.
But there are other boundaries as well.
So let's take a look at this slide.
There's an example at the bottom
that illustrates line and word break.
And you'll see that line break and
word break are not the same thing,
although they're often thought
of as being the same thing.
So, for example,
if I'm doing line breaking,
it's acceptable to
break after the hyphen.
But if I'm doing word breaking,
that is determining
what constitutes a word,
either for double-clicking or
for doing whole word searching,
then breaking in the middle
of that is not acceptable.
So line breaking and word
breaking are different.
At the moment,
the only APIs that are available
for doing this kind of breaking
operate at the Unicar array level,
so that's the Unicode utilities.
The first step is to create a
text break locator by calling
uccreateTextBreakLocator,
and you specify when you
create it which kinds of text
boundaries you're interested in,
whether it's a cluster boundary or
a word boundary or a line boundary.
And then you can call ucfindTextBreak to
iterate through the breaks in your text,
either in a forward
or backward direction.
If you're interested
in cluster boundaries,
then as I mentioned earlier in the talk,
there's CFString, get range of composed
characters at index,
which works at the CFString level.
But if you need line or word breaks,
then you need to call
the UniCode utilities.
Okay, the last topic that we're
going to cover is dates,
times, and numbers.
So there are several things you
need to be able to do with dates,
times, and numbers.
One is to convert a date that's in
a binary format or a time into a
string to display it to the end user,
or the user might have typed a date
or a time into a text entry field,
and you need to convert it back
to a binary number so you can
perform an operation on it.
And in the old world, there were several
APIs available for that.
I'm not going to read them all off,
but they're all deprecated now.
In Panther,
we introduced CFDateFormatter,
which is a new set of APIs in
Core Foundation that do
this in the UniCode world.
And so we'll go through
a small example here.
Again, CFDateFormatter has a fair number
of APIs that we don't have time
to go into detail on all of them,
so I'll just go through a short example.
You can use CFDateFormatter
createStringWithAbsoluteTime to use
a CFDateFormatter and convert time,
a binary number, into a string.
If you're going in the other direction,
you use CFDateFormatter
getAbsoluteTime from string.
Again, you pass a CFDateFormatter
and the string,
and you'll get back a binary time.
Thirdly,
CFDate formatters have properties
that you can set on them that
control how the formatting is done.
And you can use CFDate formatter
set property to set a particular
property on the date formatter.
So here's a complete
example we'll go through.
First, we create our date formatter.
Again,
we pass null to indicate the standard
storage allocator for core foundation.
We need to pass a locale to specify what
kind of date formatting we're doing,
because the date formatting for, say,
U.S.
English is very different from
that for Japanese or German or
Dutch or what have you.
So we call CFLocale copy current,
which gives us back the
user's current locale.
Now, if you were doing this
in a real application,
you'd want to save the user's
current locale so that you
don't keep calling CFLocale copy
current over and over again.
Because, first of all,
you'd get a lot of copies.
And second of all,
you want to take a snapshot of
the user's current locale so
that you get consistent results.
The other thing we need to specify when
we're creating our CFDate formatter is
what style of date and time we want.
In this case,
we're saying we want the long date
style and the long time style.
And the next thing we're going to do is,
since in this example we're
going to convert a date entered
by the user into a binary time,
we're going to set the lenient
property on the date-time formatter.
And we do that by calling
CFDateFormatterSetProperty,
passing the formatter and the key for the
lenient property and setting it to true.
Now, what that's used for is,
if you don't set this property,
when you try to convert a date or
time string to a binary number,
CFDateFormatter will try to match
it exactly against the template
that's used for formatting dates,
for converting a date from
a binary number to a string.
And if it doesn't exactly
match that template,
the conversion will fail.
What the lenient property does is it
sets the date formatter so that it will
try as hard as possible to interpret.
The input string as a date or time,
even if it doesn't match the
template that it's expecting.
So you pretty much always
want to set this unless you're
doing some kind of validation.
And the final call we
make is get absolute,
CFDate formatter get
absolute time from string.
We pass our CFDate formatter, the string,
that's the input.
You have the ability
to pass some options,
but we're passing null in this case.
And finally, you pass a pointer to the
CF absolute time to be filled in.
Now, sometimes you have to do
operations on dates that,
other than converting them to
strings or converting them back
from strings to a binary number,
sometimes you need to
do calendar operations.
An example might be,
take this date and add one month,
or take this date and add one year.
And so in the Script Manager world,
there were APIs like toggle date and
validate and long date to seconds and
long seconds to date that converted
between the binary form of time and
a structure which specified the year,
month, day, et cetera, separately.
So the time for new APIs,
the time type for new
APIs is CF absolute time.
And for a while,
there's been a set of APIs for
CF absolute time for doing computations
with the Gregorian calendar.
And those were, I don't know what release
they were introduced in,
but they've been in for
a couple of releases now.
But those APIs can't handle
non-Gregorian calendars,
which we're adding more
support for in Tiger.
And so we're introducing a new type,
CF calendar.
It's a new core foundation type.
And it's a set of APIs that will
work with any kind of calendar.
And so we're using the new type,
CF calendar, to do calendar computations
such as toggling dates,
validating dates,
and getting components of dates.
And this API did not
make the preview release,
the WWDC preview release,
but it is something we're
working on for Tiger.
So I'm just going to tell you a
little bit about it today since
you can't work with it yet.
CF Calendar can do things
like create a set of calendar
values to an absolute time.
So, for example, if you give it a year,
a month, and a day,
you can convert that to an absolute time.
It can also go in the other direction.
It can take an absolute time
and pick out the calendar
components that correspond to it.
And finally,
it can do toggling operations,
such as taking an absolute time
and adding a fixed quantity to it,
such as a year, a month, or a day.
So this is the multi-calendar
replacement for the Gregorian calendar
APIs that are in there right now,
and look for it in a
Tiger release coming soon.
Well, very similar to dates and times,
we also need to be able to convert
numbers between a binary format and
a string that a user can understand.
So, and again, that needs to be done in a
locale-sensitive way because different
countries have different conventions
for the way that numbers are formatted.
In the WorldText world,
there were APIs available for doing that.
In Panther,
we introduced CFNumber Formatter,
which is the UniCode equivalent.
And again,
we'll go through a short example.
CFNumberFormatter has several APIs that
we don't have time to go into.
You can create a string with a
value using CFNumberFormatter,
and you just pass the formatter.
You have to specify the type of
the value because it could be,
say, a floating point number, a double,
a long, what have you.
So you need to specify what type it is.
You can also go in the other direction.
You can take a string and
interpret it as a number using
CFNumberFormat or GetValueFromString.
And again, you pass the format or the
string and some other options,
and you'll get a number out.
Finally,
you can also set the format that's
used for a number formatter.
If you create a number
formatter with a locale,
you'll get the default
format for that locale.
But number formatters use a formatting
string that is very similar to the
pattern string that you might see in
a spreadsheet program such as Excel.
You can set your own format strings
to format numbers in a particular way.
You do that by calling
CFNumber.formatter.set.format and
passing a string that represents
the format pattern to use.
Here's an example.
We'll format a number.
We create our number formatter using,
again, the default storage allocator.
Again, we pass a copy of the
user's current locale.
And again,
you want to save that away as opposed to,
getting it every time
you make this API call.
And in this case,
we're saying we want a number formatter
that uses the currency style because
we're going to be formatting currency.
We have a double,
which stores the currency
amount we want to format.
It's a floating point number 42.
We call
CFNumber.formatter.createStringWithValue.
Again, the default storage allocator.
We pass the number formatter
that we created two lines back.
We specify that we're passing a double.
And then we pass the
address of the variable.
And this API will then return a
string with that number formatted as
currency according to the conventions
of the user's current locale.
So that has been our whirlwind
tour of the Unicode APIs that
are replacements for WorldScript.
Again, we did not have time to go into
detail on all of them because
there are a lot of APIs out there.
But the goal of this presentation
was to help you to understand how
to translate a particular piece of
your existing WorldScript application
to the Unicode world.
So hopefully this application,
this presentation,
gave you the pointers you
need to know where to go in
the documentation to do that.
If you have further questions,
the first person you should
contact is Xavier Legault,
who is the representative
for these technologies in
worldwide developer relations.
You can also contact me,
but please do try Xavier first.
Rather than give you a long
list of URLs to go to for
information on Unicode APIs,
there's a one-stop shopping page,
and this is the URL.
If you go to our Unicode
Reference Library page,
you'll find links to all the API sets
and all the documentation you need to
convert your application to Unicode.